Clever Cloud deploy guide (#9030)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/deploy/clever-cloud.mdx

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Clever Cloud
description: How to deploy your Astro site to the web on Clever Cloud.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---

> import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
> import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
> import { CardGrid, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
```

Author: _Idem_

Author: Can't commit suggestion on outdated files, but applied it in the current file.

> [Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is an European Platform as a Service that provides hightly automated and scalable services to enhance developers experience at industrial levels. 
> 
> This guide includes instructions for deploying to Clever Cloud through the console UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is a European cloud platform that provides automated, scalable services. You can deploy your Astro app with Clever Cloud as a static or node application.
```

## Project Configuration

Your Astro project can be deployed on Clever Cloud in two different ways: as a **Static** application, or as a **Node.js** application, regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/rendering-modes/)). However, you'll need less configuration when deploying a Node.js application, since it works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.

### Port and host

Applications on Clever Cloud listen on port **8080**. There are two ways to set your port and your host in Astro:

1. In `package.json` scripts:

    ```json
     "scripts": {
    "start": "astro dev --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080",
    "build": "astro build"
    } 
    ```

2. In `astro.config.mjs`:

    ```javascript
    import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

    export default defineConfig({
        server: {
            port: 8080,
            host: true
        }
    });

>     ```

Author: Resolved in commit `91130bd490cf83e22baff3abf1c5f9756e3806cd`

<Steps>

1. From the lateral menubar, click **Create** > **An application**
2. Choose how to deploy:

    - **Create a brand new app**: to deploy from a local repository with Git
    
    or
    
    - **Select a GitHub repository**: to deploy from GitHub

3. Select a **Node.js** application, or a **Static** one.
	4. Set up the minimal size for your instance and scalability options: Astro can be deployed in a **Nano** instance as minimal size. Instance sizes depends of your application specifications and dependencies. We suggest you start with the smallest instance and then adjust accordingly as you watch the metrics from the **Overview** page.
5. Select a **region** where to deploy your instance.
6. **Add-ons**: Unless you're using a database or Keycloak, you shouldn't need any add-on. See [Further Configuration](#further-configuration) if you do.
7. Inject **environment variables**:

    - For **Node.js**, no specific environment variable is needed to deploy Astro.

    - For a **Static** application, add these variables:

    ```shell
    CC_POST_BUILD_HOOK="npm run build"
    CC_PRE_BUILD_HOOK="npm install && npm run astro telemetry disable"
    CC_WEBROOT="/dist"

>     ````

Author: I'm doing some tests with Yarn and pnpm to be sure and I'll push these options, thank you!

8. **Deploy!** If you're deploying from **GitHub**, your deployment should start automatically. If you're using **Git**, copy the remote and push on **master** branch. 

</Steps>

:::tip[Other Branches]
Deploy from other branches than `master` branch by using `git push clever <branch>:master`. For example, if you don't want to rename your local `main` branch, use `git push clever main:master`.
:::

> ## Further configuration
> 
> This section explores further configuration for your Astro application on Clever Cloud.
> 
> ### Scalability
> 
> Enable auto-scalability in **Scalability** option, to automatically allocate ressources to the server according to its consumption. This is especially recommended if your Astro app uses Server-Side Rendering (SSR).
> 
> #### Dedicated build instance
> 
> Aditionnally, enabling a dedicated build instance is available from the **Information** otpion in your application menu. Once the build succeeds, your application runs in the minimal instance size you've set.
> 
> Check your metrics in the application **Overview** during build, and activate if you see consumption pics during the build phase.  
> 
> Click the Grafana icon on the metrics overview to access the application dedicated Grafana dashboard for more detailed metrics.
> 
> ### Add-ons: Databases, Keycloak, Analytics
> 
> Clever Cloud provides different add-ons you could find useful to connect to your Astro application, such as:
> 
> - **Databases**: PostrgreSQL, MySQL, MongoDB, Redis...
> - **Keycloak**: If your application uses [Keycloak auth provider from Auth.js](https://authjs.dev/getting-started/authentication/oauth), Clever Cloud provides a Keykloak add-on.
> - **Matomo**: To monitor your application web analytics as an alternative to Google Analytics.
> 
> To connect a service to your Astro application, create an add-on and connect it to your application directly from the Console. See all available add-ons on [Clever Cloud documentation](https://developers.clever-cloud.com/doc/addons/).

Reviewer: This contains helpful info, however deployment guides should be succinct, and these sit outside the goal of the recipe.
```suggestion
```

> <CardGrid>
>   <LinkCard
>     title="Node.js documentation"
>     description="Clever Cloud documentation on Node.js applications."
>     href="https://developers.clever-cloud.com/doc/applications/javascript/nodejs/"
>   />
>   <LinkCard
>     title="Static documentation"
>     description="Clever Cloud documentation on Static applications."
>     href="https://developers.clever-cloud.com/doc/applications/static/"
>   />
> </CardGrid>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Official Resources

- [Node.js documentation](https://developers.clever-cloud.com/doc/applications/javascript/nodejs/)
- [Static app documentation](https://developers.clever-cloud.com/doc/applications/static/)
```

Author: Why do you want to remove the cards? They're so pretty 🥲

Reviewer 2: This does not follow our format. Additionally, it removes a section header from the table of contents which is used for organization, linking and discoverability.

Author: Noted, since I can't commit suggestion on outdated files, I've applied it in the current file.

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Clever Cloud
description: How to deploy your Astro site to the web on Clever Cloud.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import { Tabs, TabItem, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

[Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is a European cloud platform that provides automated, scalable services. You can deploy your Astro app with Clever Cloud as a static or Node application.

## Project Configuration

> Your Astro project can be deployed on Clever Cloud in two different ways: as a **Static** application, or as a **Node.js** application, regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/rendering-modes/)). However, you'll need less configuration when deploying a Node.js application, since it works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.

Reviewer 3: For internal links we don't use the domain name:
```suggestion
Your Astro project can be deployed on Clever Cloud in two different ways: as a **Static** application, or as a **Node.js** application, regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](/en/basics/rendering-modes/)). However, you'll need less configuration when deploying a Node.js application, since it works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.
```

### Port and host

Applications on Clever Cloud listen on port **8080**. If your project requires this configuration, you can set your port and host in Astro in two ways:

1. In `package.json` scripts:

>     ```json title="package.json" "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080"
>      "scripts": {
>     "dev": "astro dev",
>     "start": "astro dev",
>     "build": "astro check && astro build",
>     "preview": "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080",
>     "astro": "astro"
>     } 
>     ```

Reviewer 3: nit: indentation
```suggestion
    ```json title="package.json" "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080"
    "scripts": {
      "dev": "astro dev",
      "start": "astro dev",
      "build": "astro check && astro build",
      "preview": "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080",
      "astro": "astro"
    } 
    ```
```

2. In `astro.config.mjs`:

>     ```javascript title="astro.config.mjs"
>     import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
> 
>     export default defineConfig({
>         server: {
>             port: 8080,
>             host: true
>         }
>     });
>     ```

Reviewer 3: nit: most of the examples use two spaces for indentation
```suggestion
    ```javascript title="astro.config.mjs"
    import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

    export default defineConfig({
      server: {
        port: 8080,
        host: true
      }
    });
    ```
```

## Deploy Astro from the Console

> When deploying on Clever Cloud, follow the application wizard to deploy your astro site. These are the detailed steps:

Reviewer 3: nit:
```suggestion
When deploying on Clever Cloud, follow the application wizard to deploy your Astro site. These are the detailed steps:
```

<Steps>

1. From the lateral menubar, click **Create** > **An application**
2. Choose how to deploy:

    - **Create a brand new app**: to deploy from a local repository with Git
    
    or
    
    - **Select a GitHub repository**: to deploy from GitHub

3. Select a **Node.js** application, or a **Static** one.
4. Set up the minimal size for your instance and scalability options: Astro can be deployed in a **Nano** instance as minimal size. Instance sizes depend on your application specifications and dependencies. We suggest you start with the smallest instance and then adjust accordingly as you watch the metrics from the **Overview** page.
5. Select a **region** where to deploy your instance.

> 6. **Add-ons**: Unless you're using a database or Keycloak, you shouldn't need any add-ons. See [Further Configuration](#further-configuration) if you do.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. **Add-ons**: Unless you're using a database or Keycloak, you shouldn't need any add-ons.
```
The Further Configuration section doesn't appear to exist, so maybe it was removed in an earlier edit. Just fixing the link error!

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Clever Cloud
description: How to deploy your Astro site to the web on Clever Cloud.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import { Tabs, TabItem, Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

[Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is a European cloud platform that provides automated, scalable services.

## Project Configuration

> You can deploy both a fully static and on-demand rendered Astro projects on Clever Cloud. Regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](/en/basics/rendering-modes/)), you can choose to deploy as a **static application** which runs using a post-build hook, or as a **Node.js** application, which works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can deploy both fully static and on-demand rendered Astro projects on Clever Cloud. Regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](/en/basics/rendering-modes/)), you can choose to deploy as a **static application** which runs using a post-build hook, or as a **Node.js** application, which works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.
```

---
title: Deploy your Astro Site to Clever Cloud
description: How to deploy your Astro site to the web on Clever Cloud.
type: deploy
i18nReady: true
---
import ReadMore from '~/components/ReadMore.astro';
import { Steps } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';
import { Tabs, TabItem, CardGrid, LinkCard } from '@astrojs/starlight/components';

> [Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is a European cloud platform that provides automated, scalable services. You can deploy your Astro app with Clever Cloud as a static or node application.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Clever Cloud](https://clever-cloud.com) is a European cloud platform that provides automated, scalable services. You can deploy your Astro app with Clever Cloud as a static or Node application.
```

## Project Configuration

Your Astro project can be deployed on Clever Cloud in two different ways: as a **Static** application, or as a **Node.js** application, regardless of your `output` mode ([pre-rendered or on-demand](https://docs.astro.build/en/basics/rendering-modes/)). However, you'll need less configuration when deploying a Node.js application, since it works out-of-the-box with your `package.json`.

### Port and host

> Applications on Clever Cloud listen on port **8080**. If your project needs this set up, there are two ways to set your port and your host in Astro:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Applications on Clever Cloud listen on port **8080**. If your project requires this configuration, you can set your port and host in Astro in two ways:
```

1. In `package.json` scripts:

    ```json title="package.json" "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080"
     "scripts": {
    "dev": "astro dev",
    "start": "astro dev",
    "build": "astro check && astro build",
    "preview": "astro preview --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080",
    "astro": "astro"
    } 
    ```

2. In `astro.config.mjs`:

    ```javascript title="astro.config.mjs"
    import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

    export default defineConfig({
        server: {
            port: 8080,
            host: true
        }
    });
    ```

## Deploy Astro from the Console

When deploying on Clever Cloud, follow the application wizard to deploy your astro site. These are the detailed steps:

<Steps>

1. From the lateral menubar, click **Create** > **An application**
2. Choose how to deploy:

    - **Create a brand new app**: to deploy from a local repository with Git
    
    or
    
    - **Select a GitHub repository**: to deploy from GitHub

3. Select a **Node.js** application, or a **Static** one.

> 4. Set up the minimal size for your instance and scalability options: Astro can be deployed in a **Nano** instance as minimal size. Instance sizes depends of your application specifications and dependencies. We suggest you start with the smallest instance and then adjust accordingly as you watch the metrics from the **Overview** page.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. Set up the minimal size for your instance and scalability options: Astro can be deployed in a **Nano** instance as minimal size. Instance sizes depend on your application specifications and dependencies. We suggest you start with the smallest instance and then adjust accordingly as you watch the metrics from the **Overview** page.
```

5. Select a **region** where to deploy your instance.

> 6. **Add-ons**: Unless you're using a database or Keycloak, you shouldn't need any add-on. See [Further Configuration](#further-configuration) if you do.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
6. **Add-ons**: Unless you're using a database or Keycloak, you shouldn't need any add-ons. See [Further Configuration](#further-configuration) if you do.
```

7. Inject **environment variables**:

>     - For **Node.js**, no specific environment variable is needed to deploy Astro if you're using **npm**. If you're using **yarn** or **pnpm**, set these environoment variables:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - For **Node.js**, no specific environment variable is needed to deploy Astro if you're using **npm**. If you're using **yarn** or **pnpm**, set these environment variables:
```

      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      CC_NODE_BUILD_TOOL="yarn"
      CC_PRE_BUILD_HOOK="yarn && yarn run astro telemetry disable && yarn build"
      CC_RUN_COMMAND="yarn run preview"
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

    - For a **Static** application, add these variables:

    <Tabs>
      <TabItem label="npm">
      ```shell
    CC_POST_BUILD_HOOK="npm run build"
    CC_PRE_BUILD_HOOK="npm install && npm run astro telemetry disable"
    CC_WEBROOT="/dist"
    ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="pnpm">
      ```shell
    CC_POST_BUILD_HOOK="pnpm build"
    CC_PRE_BUILD_HOOK="npm install -g pnpm && pnpm install && pnpm run astro telemetry disable"
    CC_WEBROOT="/dist"
      ```
      </TabItem>
      <TabItem label="yarn">
      ```shell
      CC_POST_BUILD_HOOK="yarn build"
      CC_PRE_BUILD_HOOK="yarn && yarn run astro telemetry disable"
      CC_WEBROOT="/dist"
      ```
      </TabItem>
    </Tabs>

8. **Deploy!** If you're deploying from **GitHub**, your deployment should start automatically. If you're using **Git**, copy the remote and push on **master** branch. 

</Steps>

:::tip[Other Branches]

> Deploy from other branches than `master` branch by using `git push clever <branch>:master`. For example, if you don't want to rename your local `main` branch, use `git push clever main:master`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To deploy from branches other than `master`, use `git push clever <branch>:master`. For example, if you want to deploy your local `main` branch without renaming it, use `git push clever main:master`.
```
